# gradle-kotlin-accessors-generator

An annotation processor, and its companion annotation, to generate type-safe Kotlin DSL accessors for your Gradle plugin's extensions.

Gradle generates such accessors automatically for extensions that are directly attached to a project (along with tasks and configurations), but not for extensions added to tasks or to other extensions.

For those other cases, plugin authors have to provide Kotlin extension functions and properties that users will import in their build scripts.
When you write your plugin in Kotlin, you can easily declare them:

```kotlin
val SomeTask.myExtension: MyExtension
    get() = (this as ExtensionAware).extensions.getByName("myExtension") as MyExtension

fun SomeTask.myExtension(action: Action<in MyExtension>) =
    (this as ExtensionAware).extensions.configure("myExtension", action)
```

but when you write it in Java, this forces you to add Kotlin to your project only to provide those accessors, and as a result deal with version compatibilities between Kotlin, Gradle and the JDK (tl;dr: this prevents you supporting older Gradle versions, or using newer Kotlin and Gradle versions to build your plugin).

This annotation processor is meant to "fix" that by generating the accessors from plain Java code.

## Usage

1. Add the `annotations` library as a `compileOnly` dependency, and the `processor` to your annotation processor path:

    ```kotlin
    dependencies {
        compileOnly("net.ltgt.gradle.kotlin-accessors-generator:annocations:${gkag.version}")
        annotationProcessor("net.ltgt.gradle.kotlin-accesors-generator:processor:${gkag.version}")
    }
    ```

2. Configure a Kotlin module name in your `compileJava` task; the Kotlin plugin automatically configures it to the project name so you can use just that:

    ```kotlin
    tasks {
        compileJava {
            options.compilerArgs.add("-Anet.ltgt.gradle.kotlin.accessors.generator.kotlinModuleName=${project.name}")
        }
    }
    ```

3. Annotate your extension type with `@GenerateKotlinAccessors`, providing the name of your extension (I suggest using a constant) and the types of the objects your extension is added to:

    ```java
    @GenerateKotlinAccessors(name = MyExtension.NAME, receivers = SomeTask.class)
    public abstract class MyExtension {
        static final String NAME = "myExtension";
    ```

This will generate a `META-INF/${project.name}.kotlin_module` file, and for each annotated type a `$GradleKotlinAccessors$`-prefixed class (in this example that would be `$GradleKotlinAccessors$MyExtension`) in the same package with static methods implementing the accessors and the appropriate `@kotlin.Metadata` annotation to make those methods actually usable as Kotlin extensions.

Users of your plugin will then import the accessors the exact same way as if you had written them in Kotlin:

```kotlin
import com.example.myPlugin.myExtension

plugins {
    id("com.example.myPlugin")
}

tasks {
    withType<SomeTask> {
        myExtension.someProp = "some value"
        // — or —
        myExtension {
            someProp = "some value"
        }
    }
}
```

## Migrating from Kotlin

If you're migrating your plugin from using Kotlin for those accessors to generating them with this annotation processor, note that **this will be a breaking change** for any binary plugin that referenced your accessors (i.e. plugins written in Kotlin, or as Precompiled Kotlin Plugins).

You can make your plugin backward compatible by writing a Java class with the same name as that generated by Kotlin. While that class's methods could themselves reimplement the accessors, it'll be easier to just call the generated class:

```java
@Deprecated
public class MyExtensionKt {
  public static void myExtension(SomeTask receiver, Action<? super MyExtension> action) {
    $GradleKotlinAccessors$MyExtension.myExtension(receiver, action);
  }
  
  public static MyExtension getMyExtension(SomeTask receiver) {
    return $GradleKotlinAccessors$MyExtension.getMyExtension(receiver);
  }
}
```

## Limitations

While Kotlin allows developers to declare functions and properties with name containing spaces or a hyphen, this annotation processor only accepts extension names that are valid Java identifiers.
